ECE552 - Computer Architecture
Fall 2011
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Toronto

Instructor:
Prof. Natalie Enright Jerger
MAIN | COURSE OUTLINE

    The course website can be accessed through the portal for enrolled students. This page provides information to help students decide on course selection but will not be maintained throughout the semester.
    Instructor: 	

    	Prof. Natalie Enright Jerger

    	PT374A (D.L. Pratt Buidling), Tel: 978-5056, Email: enright at eecg dot toronto dot edu

    	Office Hours: Mondays 2-3 and Wednesdays 11-12 or by appointment

    Course Description. This course provides students with a solid understanding of fundamental architectural techniques used to build today's high-performance processors and systems. Course topics include pipelining, superscalar, out of order execution, multithreading, caches, virtual memory, and multiprocessors. Some emphasis will be placed on hardware/software interaction to achieve performance. Issues affecting the nexus of architecture, compilers and operating systems will be briefly touched upon.

    Nearly all engineers, regardless of sub-specialty, utilize programming in the course of their job; to write high performance computer programs, it is necessary to understand the underlying hardware that those programs will run on. Two-thirds of this course will focus on high performance architectures and memory systems. The final third of the course will focus on multiprocessors. Significant challenges face today's computer hardware industry. At the forefront of these challenges is the multi-core revolution. The transition from single processor designs to multi-core design requires hardware and software designers knowledgeable about a range of issues in parallel computing including hardware.

    Course Outcomes. Students who successfully fulfills the course requirements will have demonstrated:

        an ability to understand the design of a pipelined CPU and cache hierarchy
        an ability to analyze and evaluate CPU and memory hierarchy performance
        an understanding of trade-offs in modern CPU design including issues affecting superscalar and dynamically scheduled architectures
        an understanding of hardware design of multiprocessors including cache coherence and synchronization
        experience with a complex simulation tool to study various microarchitectural features. 

    Course Timetable
    LEC01: Prof. Natalie Enright Jerger

        Mon 1-2 RS 208
        Wed 1-2 BA 1220
        Fri 12-1 GB 244

    Tutorials

        Friday TUT01 11am - 12noon RS208
        Friday TUT02 4pm - 5pm GB412

    Evaluation Scheme
       	Assignments 	25%
       	Quizzes 	10%
       	Midterms 	30%
       	Final 	35%
    Required Textbook:
    Jean-Loup Baer, Microprocessor Architecture: From Simple Pipelines to Chip Multiprocessors, 1st edition.
    External Web Resources

        Synthesis Lectures in Computer Architecture (free downloads within UofT)
        SimpleScalar Home
        SimpleScalar Tutorial
        Computer Architecture Resources

Local Web Resources

    2005 web page
    2006 web page
    2007 web page
    2008 web page
    2009 web page
    2010 web page
    The SimpleScalar Toolset, Version 2.0
    Relationship between different types of means
    Article that examines the pentium-m architecture

MAIN | COURSE OUTLINE

